---
layout: post
title:  "The Flawed Design of Intel TDX"
categories: generic
author: julian
published: true
---

This post discusses my personal opinion of Intel's Trust Domain
Extensions (TDX). This instruction set extension is Intel's latest
attempt at implementing a [Trusted Execution Environment
(TEE)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_execution_environment).

This post does not make an attempt at trying to explain TDX. I assume
that you have a familiarity with Intel TDX at the conceptual
level. Intel has a [large set of
documents](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-trust-domain-extensions.html)
about TDX. [The introductory
overview](https://cdrdv2.intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/690419) does a
good job of getting you started and should be enough background for
this post. Otherwise, I'm assuming general knowledge about how
virtualization works.

## tl;dr

Instead of increasing the complexity of the hardware, we can have a
software-only alternative to TDX with the same security properties and
fewer downsides. We can achieve this using a secure microhypervisor
that uses existing security features of the CPU, such as
[TXT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_Execution_Technology) and
[TME-MK](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/runtime-encryption-of-memory-with-intel-tme-mk.html). This
approach would also be portable to other CPU architectures.

## Longer Version

Behind the design of TDX there are some unspoken assumptions:

1. Existing hypervisors are beyond repair from a security perspective
   and cannot be trusted.
2. Intel can write a microhypervisor (the _TDX Module_) that is secure.

I'm calling the TDX Module a microhypervisor, because it has a large
overlap with the functionality commonly found in microhypervisors. It
manages vCPU state and nested page tables, while relying on VMMs
running in lower privilege levels to do emulation. This is very
similar to how microhypervisor-based systems work, such as [this
one](http://hypervisor.org/).

Regarding the security of existing hypervisors, there are definitely
problems. Linux/KVM on x86 has a lot of emulation code[^kvmx86] that
is directly accessible by a malicious guest, is written in C and runs
with now guard rails whatsoever. Applying Google's [Rule of
2](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/master/docs/security/rule-of-2.md)
this places the system squarely in the **DOOM!** category.

[^kvmx86]: KVM on x86 does instruction decoding, instruction emulation
	and some legacy device emulation. While you can opt out of the
	legacy device emulation (`kernel-irqchip=split`), there is no way
	to opt out of the kernel's instruction emulation. Also on all
	platforms you can use VirtIO emulation in the kernel (vhost) and
	open another large attack surface.

The conclusion that Intel has drawn out of these assumptions is they
introduce a new CPU mode (SEAM mode) where they place their
microhypervisor. This microhypervisor comes as an [Authenticated Code
Module
(ACM)](https://edk2-docs.gitbook.io/understanding-the-uefi-secure-boot-chain/secure_boot_chain_in_uefi/intel_boot_guard),
which must be cryptograhically signed by Intel. The existing
hypervisor then has to use system calls using a new set of
instructions (`SEAMCALL`) to the microhypervisor that is actually in
charge. The VMs have to use new instructions (`TDCALL`) to interact
with the outside as well.

### TDX Downsides

While this design has more hope of adoption than [SGX]({% post_url
2021-11-10-intel-security-tech %}), the design comes with many
downsides.

TDX increases hardware complexity. While adding instructions is not
helping, adding a new CPU _mode_ feels an order of magnitude more
costly. Intel needs to make sure that everything the CPU already
supports works correctly in this new mode. How well Intel can cope
with hardware complexity can be seen with Spectre/Meltdown or any
errata sheet.

TDX locks out any other provider of the microhypervisor in charge of
the system by requiring the TDX module to come with an Intel
signature. Everything points to Intel never signing someone else's
code. Especially if you are not a hyperscaler, there is really nothing
to hope for here.

TDX gives the end user an extremely poor experience for security
issues. You are basically at the mercy of Intel. As long as Intel
doesn't ship an update of the TDX module, there is nothing you can do
on your own. Also no one will get advance warning for issues except
big players.

On Twitter, [I was
joking](https://twitter.com/blitzclone/status/1531751195697635330)
that the TDX module is probably written in shoddy C. Whether it's
shoddy is anyone's personal opinion, but it turns out that it _is_
actually written in C. Intel has published [its
source](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/download/738875/738876/intel-trust-domain-extension-intel-tdx-module.html). Would
you want the software you base all your security hopes on to be
written in the [least secure programming
language](https://portswigger.net/daily-swig/c-is-least-secure-programming-language-study-claims)?

### A Better Way

If you can write a secure microhypervisor (one of the assumptions of
TDX), there is actually no need to go down the road of TDX. Intel
already provide all the building blocks of a solution that gives you
the benefits of TDX with far fewer downsides.

Boot your secure microhypervisor as a normal [baremetal
hypervisor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypervisor#Classification). The
boot process can be secured via Secure Boot. You can perform [remote
attestation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_Computing#Remote_attestation)
as well. For this [Intel
TXT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_Execution_Technology) comes
in handy. The microhypervisor can defend itself at runtime using an
[IOMMU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Input%E2%80%93output_memory_management_unit)
and defend VMs using
[TME-MK](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/runtime-encryption-of-memory-with-intel-tme-mk.html).

Your legacy hypervisor can then boot as a sort of
[Dom0](https://wiki.xenproject.org/wiki/Dom0) and take ownership of
the platform hardware. Instead of calling into the TDX module, the
Dom0 can request services from the secure microhypervisor using
[regular
hypercalls](https://www.felixcloutier.com/x86/vmcall). Instead of
patching untrusted guests to use `TDCALL` to call into the TDX module,
they can use existing facilities as well.

This design gives you all the upsides of TDX. The secure
microhypervisor will enforce confidentiality protections to the degree
that you need them. At the same time, the design eliminates
practically all downsides of TDX. The update process of the secure
hypervisor does not involve Intel. If you establish your own chain of
trust, you can update the hypervisor as you please. Also, Secure Boot
(with your own keys) and TXT are usable by anyone.

You are free to implement the secure microhypervisor in any language
you want. You can write it in
[Ada/SPARK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SPARK_(programming_language))
or Rust for maximum resiliency. **At least not in C.** You can do
formal verification. You can do fuzzing. Whatever makes you feel
comfortable.

You can move the emulation code (Qemu or your favorite alternative)
from the Dom0 into host root mode outside of Dom0. The microhypervisor
can run it in a sandbox with only clearly defined access to the rest
of the system. This removes the need to patch your guest OS or
firmware and make it TDX aware, because it will just see a normal
emulated system. Even less complexity!

Finally, equivalents of Secure Boot, TXT, TME-MK exist for AMD and
other architectures. You can have the same architecture everywhere.

But instead we got TDX. ~~And unfortunately other CPU architectures
([RISC-V](https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/cc_riscv/)) have
taken it as an example. This makes me sad.~~

## Update 2023-06-09

I misunderstood the FOSDEM talk about the [RISC-V confidential
computing](https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/cc_riscv/)
efforts. [Salus](https://github.com/rivosinc/salus), the system for
confidential computing developed by
[Rivos](https://www.rivosinc.com/), is actually implementing almost
exactly what I outline above. Check out [this overview in their
README](https://github.com/rivosinc/salus#overview---initial-prototype). Way
to go! ðŸŽ‰
