---
layout: post
title:  "Intel TDX Doesn't Protect You from the Cloud"
categories: generic
author: julian
published: true
---

This post is a continuation of my [previous post about Intel TDX]({% post_url
2023-02-07-intel-tdx %}). It's
worth a read before reading this post. As before, I'm not going to
introduce TDX itself. If you need a refresher, Intel has [good overview
material]((https://cdrdv2.intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/690419)) available.

## tl;dr

While Intel TDX does make some attacks by the cloud vendor harder, you
still have to trust the cloud vendor unless you go to extreme
lengths. We need to build trustworthy virtualization stacks instead of
hoping for the silver bullet from CPU vendors.

## Longer Version

Let's take Intel TDX's promises at face value. When everything goes
well, TDX provides CPU state and memory integrity. This is useful
because it prevents trivial attacks on VMs from a compromised
hypervisor. The hypervisor cannot read secrets directly from memory or
inject code.

The problem is that in the TDX trust model, the virtual machine
monitor (think Qemu) is not trusted. Yet it emulates all virtual
devices. This means all devices are potential machiavellian devils
wanting to screw the kernel in the trusted VM. Having completely
untrusted devices opens a large attack surface to driver code written
in C, rarely considered security critical.

There is a real-world analogy here. If you are security-minded, you
want to limit access to the external ports of your laptop. For
example, [malicious USB
devices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZEZIcjhsZEk) can exploit
vulnerabilities in the operating system's USB stack to gain code
execution. But at least internal devices without exposed ports are out
of the attacker's reach.

With TDX, the attack surface includes _all_ device drivers 😭. All devices
are fair game from the attacker's perspective. The malicious VMM can
craft problematic responses from any device, such as the PCI
Configuration Space or VirtIO.

So what does this mean? Running a standard OS in a TDX Trusted Domain
(TD) instead of plain VMs gives little additional security if the
attacker is the cloud vendor. The attacker will eventually find
vulnerable device drivers to exploit because device drivers are not
typically written in a way where they consider the device's responses
malicious.

But what is there to do about this? While you can minimize drivers in
the VM to the bare minimum or run a custom high-security OS in the VM,
this takes away the charm of running a stock OS in the trusted VM. You
could rewrite all drivers and formally verify them. But that won't
happen any time soon. In reality, people will just run Ubuntu.

You could also implement device emulation in the TDX module, but there
are problems:

- You can't do it because it's not open but "shared" source. 
- Only Intel can sign the module so the CPU accepts it. 
- Itould only increase the attack surface of this monolithic blob that
  you have to trust for the complete security of TDX.

People assume that with TDX, you don't have to trust the cloud vendor
when you run your Ubuntu there. This is clearly false. You cannot
deploy a standard application into a TDX VM and expect it to be secure
from the cloud vendor.

TDX limits exposure to certain classes of attacks. For example, it is
hard for the on-call engineer with access to a VM host to extract
secrets from a TDX TD. Yet TDX does not provide protection against an
entirely malicious cloud vendor that can arbitrarily deploy device
emulation code.

But then there is also the burden on the end user. Suppose you don't
do remote attestation and bind your secrets to the VM's configuration
using Trusted Computing magic. In that case, TDX brings no benefit at
all. You can't tell whether your VM runs inside a TDX TD or some
software emulation of it.

Not all is lost, though. Check out my previous blog post, which shows
a way that sidesteps these problems by allowing devices to be
trustworthy. Ultimately, it comes down to the cloud vendor becoming
trustworthy and not only trusted. Confidential computing technologies,
such as Intel TDX, are a puzzle piece. Still, there is no trustworthy
virtualization without a trustworthy virtualization stack.

## Update 2023-08-06

The [Linux Guest Hardening
documentation](https://intel.github.io/ccc-linux-guest-hardening-docs/index.html)
indirectly makes the same point as the blog post above. There are
multiple fun points in the document, but the main point is this:

> Every time a driver performs a port IO or MMIO read, access a pci
> config space or reads values from MSRs or CPUIDs, there is a
> possibility for a malicious hypervisor to inject a malformed value.

Don't expect to get solid security out of TDX any time soon:

> While some of the hardening approaches outlined above are still a
> work in progress or left for the future, it provides a solid
> foundation for continuing this work by both the industry and the
> Linux community.

